Chandkaushik
This is from the time
when Mahaveer Swami took diksha and was wandering.
He was always busy in meditation, austerity, fasting, penance etc.
One day he decided to go to Vachala village
The way to go there passed through a forest
A snake named Chandkaushik used to live in that forest
He was very poisonous
It was said that even if he looked at someone,
that person would die
That's why the people living around the forest used to be very scared
When people came to know
that Lord Mahavir Swami was about to travel through the forest,
they asked him to take another route,
but He was Lord Mahavir Swami
who practiced 'Ahimsa Parmo Dharma'
He had neither any fear
nor any feeling of condemnation towards anyone
There was always a sense of peace and kindness on his face
That's why he explained to the villagers
and decided to walk through the forest only.
While walking, when he moved forward through the forest,
he saw dry grass as soon, as he went a little distance.
All the trees and plants had dried up.
The whole forest seemed like a dry battlefield.
Lord understood
that Chandkaushik was somewhere nearby
and he stood there to meditate.
As soon as Chandkaushik came to know
that there was someone near the pit,
he came out of it.
Seeing a person in front of him,
he got angry and started thinking
"He has so much courage that he is standing at my place ?"
Chandkaushik started to scare Lord Mahavir.
He did not know about the power of the Bhagwant.
He got ready to bite him, by spreading his hood in anger,
but seeing that it was not having any effect on the Lord
nor was he running away from there,
Chandkaushik became very angry
and gave venomous stings to Lord Mahavir Swami three times,
but It had no effect on Lord Mahavir Swami.
Neither anything happened to him nor his attention was distracted.
Seeing this, Chandkaushik got very upset and got furious
and stung the Lord's thumb again.
This time he saw that nothing happened to the Bhagwant,
but instead of blood, a stream of milk was flowing out of his thumb.
He saw that there was no fear or anger on Lord Mahavir Swami's face,
but only compassion.
He opened his eyes
and looking at Chandkaushik said -
Lord Mahavir : "O Chandkaushik! Be calm, be calm!
Lord Mahavir : ""O Chandkaushik! Be calm, be calm!
Lord Mahavir : "Try to understand what you are doing."
These words full of love and compassion
showed their effect on Chandkaushik
and he became calm.
When he calmed down, he thought
that he had seen such saint somewhere before.
By the grace of the Lord, he remembered his two previous births
and he understood the truth of his life.
He saw that it was because of anger and pride that he became Chandkaushik.
He decided that now he has to leave anger and become calm
and then he bowed down at the feet of the Lord
with great respect
and went back to his pit.
When people came to know about this
that now Chandkaushik does not harm anyone,
Some people even started worshiping him
and started offering him milk and food.
Because of the milk and food,
the ants stung him on his entire body.
Still he lay calm without getting angry
and died a few days later.
Due to self-control and mastering anger
his sins were destroyed
and he attained heaven.
Fear, anger and ego,
are not violence towards others, but self-harm.
A reflection of this can be observed in the present life of Chandakaushik.
Hence, we should abandon these
and adopt a correct attitude fearlessly.
So kids!
Due to anger and pride in the previous birth,
he had to become "Chandkaushik" the snake, in this birth,
but after being calm and tolerating anger with equanimity,
he attained Devlok.
If we give up anger, we too shall attain salvation.